[[1. Preliminaries]](01. Preliminaries.md) [[Home]](../ReadMe.md) [[3. Values]](03. Values.md)

# 2. Your First Lines Of Code

Now that you have everything setup, you are now ready to write your first lines of code!

Open the Scala console as I showed you before by typing `sbt console` in a **[Command Prompt](http://windows.microsoft.com/en-gb/windows-vista/open-a-command-prompt-window)**.  
Try typing `1 + 3` and press **Enter**, you should see:
```scala
scala> 1 + 3
res0: Int = 4
```
Let's decode what's written here:
* `res0`: Scala likes to give names to your calculations. `res0` means result n°0. If you do other calculations, it will name them `res1`, `res2`, `res3` and so on...
* `Int`: Int is the abbreviation of Integer. The numbers 1, 5, -1 and -14 are all integers.

  > :raising_hand: Why Scala displays it?

  Don't worry, it doesn't tries to teach you maths, it just wants to tell you that the result of `1 + 3` is an integer.
* `4`: this is just the so awaited result of the expression `1 + 3`, and yes `1 + 3` = `4`! :relieved:

So, in English, the displayed line is equivalent to "The result of your calculation n°0 is an integer, that is equal to 4".

Congrats, you officially wrote your first line of code! :tada:

## Play with Integers

```scala
scala> 2 + 5
res1: Int = 7

scala> 5
res2: Int = 5
```

A little bit of vocabulary:
* `1 + 3` is an **expression**.
* `4` is the result of the evaluation of the expression `1 + 3`.
* `Int` is the **type** or the **class** of `4`.
* `1`, `3` and `4` are **objects of type Int** or **instances of class Int**.
* `+` is an **operator** or a **method**, all objects of the same type (or class) have the same operators/methods.

There is a lot of new words and definitions you'll learn at the beginning, but with the time and a little bit of practice all of that will make perfect sense to you.

Other method exists on `Int`: `-`, `*`, `/` et `%`.
* `-`: substract
* `*`: multiply
* `/`: divide
* `%`: remainder of an integer division

Let's try those operators:
```scala
scala> 4 * 5
res3: Int = 20

scala> 8 / 2
res4: Int = 4

scala> 5 % 2
res5: Int = 1

scala> 5 / 2
res6: Int = 2
```

> :raising_hand: Hey! Why `5 / 2` is equal to `2`? Shouldn't it be `2.5`?

Yes indeed, but here we are doing an Integer division. As stated the result `2` is an `Int` (Integer), so it can't contain decimal numbers.

> :information_source: Reminder: An Integer division is a division in which the fractional part (remainder, the bit after the `.`) is discarded.  
> Example: `11 / 2` is equal to `5,5` in a normal division. But in an Integer division `11 / 2` is equal to `5`! And the reste of the integer division 11 by 2 is `11 - 2 * 5 = 1`.

Scala will always do an Integer division if both part of the division are Integers.  
So you can do a decimal division by using... decimal numbers:
```scala
scala> 5 / 2.0
res7: Double = 2.5

scala> 5.0 / 2
res8: Double = 2.5
```

> :raising_hand: Wait, why it's written `Double` and not `Int` like it was before?

(Answer below)

## Decimal numbers

Your question brings us to learn a new **type**: `Double`! Remember `Int` is a **type** too.  
A `Double` is a **decimal number** and you can specify that a number is a `Double` by adding a `.0` at the end of your integer.
So if you type:
```scala
scala> 5.3
res9: Double = 5.3
```
it tells you that this is a `Double`.

> :information_source: Note that if you specify one `Double` and one `Int` in an operation the result will be in the most precise one, which is `Double` in this case.

Let's play a bit more with it:
```scala
scala> 5.45 * 3.5
res10: Double = 19.075
```

Scala is very good in maths! Moreover, it respects the priority of mathematic operators, so a calculation like `2 + 5 * 3` return `17` (like in maths) and not 21. If we want 21, we will need to use brackets just like in maths: `(2 + 5) * 3`.

> :information_source: Mathematic reminder: the brackets have the highest priority. We find after the operators `%`, `*` and `/` and lastly `+` and `-`. The operation of which the operator has the highest priority is calculated first.

```scala
scala> 2 + 5 * 3
res11: Int = 17

scala> (2 + 5) * 3
res12: Int = 21
```

If we have operator of the same priority (`*` and `/`, for example) the expression is evaluated from the left to the right:
```scala
scala> 10 / 2 * 5
res13: Int = 25
```

## Characters

A character can be a letter, a number or a symbole, put in between apostrophes:
```scala
scala> 'a'
res0: Char = a

scala> 'Z'
res1: Char = Z

scala> '5'
res2: Char = 5

scala> '*'
res3: Char = *
```
`'a'`, `'Z'`, `'5'` and `'*'` are objects of **type** `Char`.  
One more type learned!

## Strings of Characters

A Strings of Characters, called commonly a **String**, is just a sequence of characters put in between quotes:
```scala
scala> "Hi guys!"
res0: String = Hi guys!
```

So let's see what we can do with `String`s.  
The **method** (operator) `+` on a `String` let's us concatenate another `String` after it:
```scala
scala> "Hi guys! " + "How are you?"
res1: String = Hi guys! How are you?
```

We can also concatenate with other types like a `Double`:
```scala
scala> "Here is a Double: " + 3.4
res2: String = Here is a Double: 3.4
```
It will turn the `Double` to a `String` automatically.

It is also possible to have multiple lines in a `String` with the character `\n`. Yes `\n` is considered as one character, this is in fact `\` that is used to specify something special like a new line and `n` which means a new line:
```scala
scala> "Hi guys!\nHow are you?"
res3: String =
Hi guys!
How are you?
```

> :raising_hand: How can I do a simple `\` if this is reserved to declare special characters?

You write it twice `\\`. And it's the same if you want to write a simple `"` you can do `\"`.

Let's get a `Char` of a `String` at a specified position:

> :information_source: We count from 0 and not 1!

```scala
scala> "Hello" charAt 0
res4: Char = H

scala> "Hello" charAt 2
res5: Char = l
```
And many more but we'll stop here for now otherwise your head will explode! (I assume if you are still reading, it didn't explode yet)

## Booleans

A `Boolean` is a type that can only take 2 state. There is no negociation possible, it's either `true` or `false`, that's it!

```scala
scala> true
res0: Boolean = true

scala> false
res1: Boolean = false
```

Has you can see, the **type** of `true` and `false` is `Boolean`.  
The operators on `Boolean`s are AND, OR and NOT:

### AND
The operator AND in Scala is named `&&`.  
`a && b` is `true` if `a` **and** `b` are `true`. It is `false` as soon as one of the two operands is `false`.

Here is a table of all the possible cases:

|   a   |   b   | a AND b |
|:-----:|:-----:|:-------:|
| true  | true  |  true   |
| true  | false |  false  |
| false | true  |  false  |
| false | false |  false  |

Let's try:
```scala
scala> true && true
res2: Boolean = true
```

### OR
The operator OR in Scala is named `||`.  
`a || b` is `true` if `a` **or** `b` is `true`. It is `false` only when both operands are `false`.

Here is a table of all the possible cases:

|   a   |   b   | a OR b |
|:-----:|:-----:|:------:|
| true  | true  |  true  |
| true  | false |  true  |
| false | true  |  true  |
| false | false | false  |

Let's try:
```scala
scala> true || false
res3: Boolean = true
```

### NOT
The operator NOT in Scala is named `!` and is placed in front of what we want to invert.  
`!a` is `true` if `a` is `false`. It is `false` if `a` is `true`.

Here is a table of all the possible cases:

|   a   | NOT a |
|:-----:|:-----:|
| true  | false |
| false | true  |

Let's try:
```scala
scala> !true
res4: Boolean = false
```

Let's try mixing them:
```scala
scala> !true
res5: Boolean = false

scala> !true && true
res6: Boolean = false

scala> !(false && false)
res7: Boolean = true
```

> :raising_hand: Ok but what is the purpose of this `Boolean` type?

It is particularly useful when we do comparison between numbers, for example, the method `<` checks if the first number is strictly lower than the second or not:
```scala
scala> 2 < 5
res5: Boolean = true

scala> 2.2 < 2
res6: Boolean = false
```
The value of the expression `a < b` is always either `true` or `false`.  

> :information_source: Note that we can compare 2 numbers of different types (`Int` and `Double`).

Here is a list of the comparison operators:

| Operator |      Role       | Example | Result |
|:--------:|:---------------:|:-------:|:------:|
|    ==    |    Equality     | 5 == 5  |  true  |
|    !=    |   Non equality  | 5 != 5  | false  |
|    <     | Strictly lower  |  5 < 5  | false  |
|    <=    | Lower or equal  | 5 <= 5  |  true  |
|    >     | Strictly higher |  5 > 5  | false  |
|    >=    | Higher or equal | 5 >= 5  |  true  |

Two instances (objets, even the ones that are not numbers) can be compared with the methods (or operators) `==` and `!=`.
```scala
scala> 5 == 5
res7: Boolean = true

scala> -3 > -3
res8: Boolean = false

scala> "Bonjour" == "Good Morning"
res9: Boolean = false
```

## Conditional expression

`Boolean`s are very useful when doing conditional statments. A conditional statment is written:
```scala
if (CONDITION) EXPRESSION1 else EXPRESSION2
```
I explain:
*CONDITION* is an instance of the class `Boolean`, it is either `true` or `false`.
* If *CONDITION* is `true` then *EXPRESSION1* is evaluated
* If *CONDITION* is `false` then it's *EXPRESSION2* that is evaluated.

So let's try it out:
```scala
scala> if (true) 2 else 3
res0: Int = 2

scala> if (0 > 1) "Good morning" else "Good afternoon"
res1: String = Good afternoon

scala> if (1 + 5 == 6) true else false
res2: Boolean = true
```

We can even add another condition inside a `else`:
```scala
scala> if (0 == 1) "Good morning" else if (0 == 2) "Good afternoon" else "Good night"
res3: String = Good night
```

Alright, you already learned to much about basic operations in Scala. Hopefully I didn't loose you.

## Exercises

#### Exercise 1
**Compute** with the SBT console the following expression:
* 8 + 3
* 1 + 7 * 2
* (1 + 7) * 2
* (12 % 3) * (5 / 2)

[:scroll: Solution](solutions/02. Your First Lines Of Code/Exercise 1.md)

#### Exercise 2
What is the **type** of 'a', 'b', and 'z'? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/02. Your First Lines Of Code/Exercise 2.md)

#### Exercise 3
1. What is the **type** of 1.0? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/02. Your First Lines Of Code/Exercise 3.1.md)
2. What happens if we do the **sum** of an object of this type and an other of type `Int`? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/02. Your First Lines Of Code/Exercise 3.2.md)

#### Exercise 4
1. What means **concatenate**? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/02. Your First Lines Of Code/Exercise 4.1.md)
2. What is the **type** of the object returned by a **concatenation** of a `String` with a `Int` or a `Double`? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/02. Your First Lines Of Code/Exercise 4.2.md)

#### Exercise 5
Evaluate the following expressions:
* (true || false) && true
* true || (false && true)
* (true && false) && true
* 5 == 2 + 3
* 'A' < 23
* "123456789" == "123456879"

[:scroll: Solution](solutions/02. Your First Lines Of Code/Exercise 5.md)

[[1. Preliminaries]](01. Preliminaries.md) [[Home]](../ReadMe.md) [[3. Values]](03. Values.md)
