[[2. Your First Lines Of Code]](02.%20Your%20First%20Lines%20Of%20Code.md) [[Home]](../ReadMe.md) [[4. Variables]](04.%20Variables.md)

# 3. Values

When we code we often have to **store** the result of a computation. For example if we are calculating some prices including the tax we might want to **store** the percentage of tax that applies.
The fact that we have to write the tax multiple times in the console:
* is **tedious** :tired_face:.
* we don't want to take the risk of make any **error** as we type it multiple times.
* and the day the value changes we want to be able to change it at **only one place**.

The solution is to store the value of the tax in a box called a... **value**.  
We can create a value by writing:
```scala
val NAME: TYPE = VALUE
```

* `val` is the **keyword** of the language that correspond to a **value**. A **keyword** is a way to tell Scala to do "something special". Here, `val` tells Scala that we will create a **value**.

  > :information_source: By the way, you already used other key words: `if` and `else` that tells Scala we are using a conditionnal statement.
* *NAME* is the name we want to give to our **value** (for example taxRate, x, myValue).
* *TYPE* is the **type** of the value we want to store (`Int`, `Boolean`, `String`...). We will be able to put in only values that have this **type**.
* *VALUE* is any object that have the type specified in *TYPE*. If an expression (Example: `4 + 6`) is given, the expression will be calculated and only it's result will be stored.

Let's create our value that will contains the value of the tax rate:
```scala
scala> val taxRate: Double = 0.20
taxRate: Double = 0.2
```
We start by the key word `val` followed by the **name** of the value: `taxRate`. We want to store 0.20, in this value, which is a decimale number and therefore of **type** `Double`, so we will need `taxRate` to be of the same **type** `Double`. Finally we initialize `taxRate` to `0.20`. Scala displays the result of your value declaration (without the val).

To use the value, we only need to write it's name. The later is then replaced by the value we put in the magic box:
```scala
scala> taxRate
res0: Double = 0.2
```

We can even do operations with it (it was our goal since the beginning, calculate the tax for a price):
```scala
scala> 20 * taxRate
res1: Double = 4.0

scala> 20 * (1 + taxRate)
res2: Double = 24.0
```

We can also directly assign the result to another value.  
So let's calculate the price this course of programming will cost you, including the tax :euro::
```scala
scala> val coursePrice: Int = 10000
coursePrice: Int = 10000

scala> val tax: Double = coursePrice * taxRate
tax: Double = 2000.0

scala> val priceTaxIncluded: Double = coursePrice * (1 + taxRate)
priceTaxIncluded: Double = 12000.0
```

Hey don't go away! We can negotiate!

## Terminology

We can't name a **value** as we want, there is some rules to follow, the name:
* can contains letters, digits and symbols but no white space (space, tab, new line).
* can't start with a digit.
* shouldn't contains brackets (round, curly or square), dots, commas, colons, semicolons, apostrophes or quotes.
* should be different from key words reserved for the language.

Thus the names `1ab`, `I'llBe` or `I am` are not valid. But `yes`, `hello`, `purée` and `!!+*%?` are valid.

Other than the limitations imposed by the language, programmers (yes, yes, you are concerned now :wink:) have agreed on a **naming convention** where they always start the name of a value with a lowercase letter and for values named with multiple words (for example "price tax included"), they will use the **camelCase** notation ("priceTaxIncluded" :heavy_check_mark:) and never words separated by underscores ("price_tax_included" :x:).

## Type inference

In Scala the type on values is actually optional. So we can write:
```scala
scala> val coursePrice = 10000
coursePrice: Int = 10000
```
And it works!

> :raising_hand: So how Scala knows what is the type of the value?

That is what the type inference is for, Scala is able to **infer** the type of the value by looking at the type of the evaluated expression after the `=` sign. Mr Scala is smart :wink:.

## Little extras

`if`/`else`s are expressions so their results can be stored in `val`s:
```scala
scala> val isMorning = false
isMorning: Boolean = false

scala> val greeting = if (isMorning) "Good morning" else "Good afternoon"
greeting: String = Good afternoon
```

When you write an expression in the console without any `val`, like:
```scala
scala> 1 + 3
res3: Int = 4
```
`res3` is actually the result assigned to a value you can use later:
```scala
scala> res3 * 2
res4: Int = 8
```

## Exercises

#### Exercise 1
1. What is the **key word** to create a value? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/03.%20Values/Exercise%201.1.md)
2. Is the **type** mandatory for a value? If not, how Scala is able to guess the type? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/03.%20Values/Exercise%201.2.md)
3. Create a **value** initialised to `"I am a value"`. [:scroll: Solution](solutions/03.%20Values/Exercise%201.3.md)

#### Exercise 2
I am very nice today, I am giving 30% discount on this course.  
Calculate the price this course of programming will cost you, including the tax but with the negotiated discount and store the result in a value.  
[:scroll: Solution](solutions/03.%20Values/02.%20Your%20First%20Lines%20Of%20Code)

[[2. Your First Lines Of Code]](02.%20Your%20First%20Lines%20Of%20Code.md) [[Home]](../ReadMe.md) [[4. Variables]](04.%20Variables.md)
