[[3. Values]](03. Values.md) [[Home]](../ReadMe.md) [[5. Blocks Of Code]](05. Blocks Of Code.md)

# 4. Variables

You know how to store a computation in a value and you might now wonder how we can change the value?
> :raising_hand: Easy:
> ```scala
> scala> val coursePrice = 10000
> coursePrice: Int = 10000
>
> scala> coursePrice = 5000
> <console>:8: error: reassignment to val
>        coursePrice = 5000
>                    ^
> ```
> Oh :flushed:

Ahah, I forgot to tell you that a value is in other words a **constant** and therefore is not mutable (not reassignable) once initialized.

> :raising_hand: Why a value is not mutable?

By experience developers noticed that if the values are mutable, we often end up with bugs due to some code (introduced by inadvertence) modifying the value and the rest of the computation becomes wrong. That's why we almost always use a value instead of a variable.  
Bear in mind that a variable has to have a very good raison to be used.

But sometimes we have no choice of using a mutable value, so Scala has a way to declare a mutable value and it's called a **variable**:
```scala
var NAME: TYPE = VALUE
```
Only the **keyword** is different compare to a value.

Let's create our variable that will contain the price of the course:
```scala
scala> var coursePrice = 10000
coursePrice: Int = 10000
```
We can now modify it to a more raisonnable price:
```scala
scala> coursePrice = 5
coursePrice: Int = 5
```
And all works!

5€ is still too expensive? Ok for 4.5€?
```scala
scala> coursePrice = 4.5
<console>:8: error: type mismatch;
 found   : Double(4.5)
 required: Int
       coursePrice = 4.5
                     ^
```

Ah, I forgot to tell you that even if a **variable** is mutable, its **type** is not! Once initialized a variable must always contain the same type.  
You will then have to use another value or variable to store a different type.

## Exercises

#### Exercise 1
1. What is the **key word** to create a variable? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/04. Variables/Exercise 1.1.md)
2. Is the **type** mandatory for a value? If not, how Scala is able to guess the type? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/03. Values/Exercise 1.2.md)
3. In which consequence should we use a **variable** instead of a value? [:scroll: Solution](solutions/04. Variables/Exercise 1.3.md)
4. Create a variable initialised to `"I am a variable"`. [:scroll: Solution](solutions/04. Variables/Exercise 1.4.md)

[[3. Values]](03. Values.md) [[Home]](../ReadMe.md) [[5. Blocks Of Code]](05. Blocks Of Code.md)
