[[8. Collections]](08. Collections.md) [[Home]](../ReadMe.md) [[10. Your First Application]](10. Your First Application.md)

# Loops

Sometimes we want to compute something many times and that is what the loops :loop: are for.

## For

One type of loop is for loops:
```scala
for (ELEMENT_VAL <- COLLECTION) EXPRESSION
```
* `for` is the **keyword** of the language that corresponds to a **for loop**.
* *COLLECTION* is the collection we will iterate throw.
* *ELEMENT_VAL* is the name of the value that will contain each element of the collection. We will then be able to use it in the *EXPRESSION*
* *EXPRESSION* is the computation that will be executed repetedly foreach element of the collection.

We can try with the Range collection, we learned earlier, `0 to 5` and multiply by 2 every element of the collection:
```scala
scala> for (i <- 0 to 5) i * 2
```

> :raising_hand: `for` doesn't return anything why?

A `for` loop actually returns a `Unit`. Try to assign the `for` loop to a `val`:
```scala
scala> val myLoop = for (i <- 0 to 5) i * 2
myLoop: Unit = ()
```

The type `Unit` is a special type you can understand as a **Unit of calculation that returns no value**.  
That's what a `for` loop is, it just computes something n times and have nothing to return.

> :raising_hand: If we return nothing then in what is it useful?

Well there is a number of things you can do that doesn't return anything, actually that returns `Unit`.  
Display something on the screen for example:
```scala
scala> println("Hello")
Hello
```
`println` is a function predefined and accessible everywhere to print a line in the console. This function also returns `Unit`.

So let's try to display something many time on the screen:
```scala
scala> for (i <- 0 to 5) println(i * 2)
0
2
4
6
8
10
```

As we already said `0 to 5` is actually a collection. That means you can replace that by an `Seq`:
```scala
scala> val words = Seq("Toto", "Hi", "Hello")
words: Seq[String] = Seq(Toto, Hi, Hello)

scala> for (s <- words) println(s)
Toto
Hi
Hello
```

## While

`while` loops are good if you want to do a computation an undermined number of time.
```scala
while (CONDITION) EXPRESSION
```
* `while` is the **key word** of the language that corresponds to a **while loop**.
* *CONDITION* is an instance of the type `Boolean`, if it's `true` it will evaluate EXPRESSION, if it's `false` it will stop the loop.
* *EXPRESSION* is the computation that will be executed repetedly until the condition returns `false`.

It's actually just like `if (CONDITION) EXPRESSION` except that the *EXPRESSION* will be executed repetedly until the condition returns `false`:
```scala
scala> while (true) println("I'm looping forever")
I'm looping forever
```
In this example it will loop forever :stuck_out_tongue_closed_eyes:

Another example:
```scala
scala> var i = 0
i: Int = 0

scala> while (i < 10) {
     |   println("i is " + i)
     |   i = i + 2
     | }
i is 0
i is 2
i is 4
i is 6
i is 8
```

## Exercises

Coming soon

[[8. Collections]](08. Collections.md) [[Home]](../ReadMe.md) [[10. Your First Application]](10. Your First Application.md)
