# 99. Traits

What is a **trait**? 
> A distinguishing quality or characteristic. [Google](https://www.google.com/search?q=trait+definition)

Yes your application can have traits, more particularly `object`s can have traits.  
Let's explain the usefulness of **traits** by an example, see those 2 objects that represent a car and a truck:  
```scala
object Car {
  def horn = "Biiiiip"
}

object Truck {
  def horn = "Pooooop"
}
```
Both can horn, differently but they both can. This is **trait** (quality or characteristic) common to a car and a truck.  
So let's see how we can write that in Scala:
```scala
trait NAME {
  BODY
}
```
* `trait` is the **key word** of the language that correspond to a **trait**.
* *NAME* is the name we want to give to our **trait** (for example HasMustache, Drivable, CanHorn).
* *BODY* is where you will write what your trait can do, the body of a trait usually contains [signatures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_signature) of **functions** and **values**. A signature is the part of the function that is before the = sign, it shows how to use the function.

So in our previous example we can create a trait:
```scala
trait CanHorn {
  def horn: String
}
```
As you can see we defined a function `horn` without it's implementation, also called a [signature](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_signature), as it will be implemented by the **objects** that have this **trait**.  
And then we can "use" the trait by extending an `object` from this `trait`, so an `object` `extends` a trait:
```scala
object Car extends CanHorn {
  def horn = "Biiiiip"
}

object Truck extends CanHorn {
  def horn = "Pooooop"
}
```
There you go, you learned a new **key word**, `extends` that specifies a trait to an object.

> :raising_hand: What is the advantage of a trait? Why would I use them?

Good question, one very basic usecase is to **unify** a functionality across your application, thus if it's unified that means you can use a fonctionality in only one way.  
Lets create a driver that knows how to make horn anything that can horn:
```scala
object Driver {
  def pressHorn(horner: CanHorn) = horner.horn
}
```
Yes a **trait** is a **type** just like the ones you already know: `String`, `Int`...! `pushHorn` now accepts anything that extends `CanHorn` and can call the function `horn` on it.

Lets use what we've created here:
```scala
scala> Driver.pressHorn(Car)
res0: String = Biiiiip

scala> Driver.pressHorn(Truck)
res0: String = Pooooop
```

## Default implementations

It is mandatory to implement the declarations of a trait, thus the following doesn't work:
```scala
scala> object Boat extends CanHorn {
     |   def honk = "PooOOOOOoOOoOOooooooooo"
     | }
<console>:8: error: object creation impossible, since method horn in trait CanHorn of type => String is not defined
       object Boat extends CanHorn {
              ^
```
Because it requires you to implement `horn` and `honk` here is not implementing it. The solution is to rename `honk` to `horn`.

But there is an exception to that: the **default implementations**.
Here is our previous example with a default implementation on `horn` in the trait:
```scala
trait CanHorn {
  def horn: String = "Biiiiip"
}

object Car extends CanHorn

object Truck extends CanHorn {
  def horn = "Pooooop"
}

object Motorbike extends CanHorn
```
* `horn` has a default implementation that will return "Biiiiip".
* `Car` and `Motorbike` uses the default implementation of `horn`
* `horn` in `Truck` override the default implementation.

> :raising_hand: Why `Car` doesn't have a **body**? Not even brackets `{}`?

If there is nothing in the body then we can remove the brackets, as they are not necessary.

Default implementations shows you another advantage of **traits**: **reduce repetitiveness** as `Bike` and `Car` is using the same code and we don't have to write it twice.  

It is possible to combine multiple traits with the key word `with`:
```scala
trait Drivable {
  def moveForward = "Moving forward"
  def moveBackward = "Moving backward"
  def break = "Breaking"
  def turnRight = "Turning right"
  def turnLeft = "Turning left"
}

object Car extends CanHorn with Drivable
object Truck extends CanHorn with Drivable {
  def horn = "Pooooop"
}
object Motorbike extends CanHorn with Drivable
```

## Exercices

Comming soon

Remember that `object` we created in the previous chapter that contains everything to calculate the price including tax.
Let's say that we now want to have an `object` for each country:
```scala
object UKPriceCalculator {
  val taxRate = 0.20

  def tax(price: Double) = price * taxRate
  
  def priceTaxIncluded(price: Double) = price + tax(price)
}
```

```scala
object GreecePriceCalculator {
  val taxRate = 0.20

  def tax(price: Double) = price * taxRate
  
  def priceTaxIncluded(price: Double) = price + tax(price)
}
```

This looks a bit repetitive no? And you can see that they actually share a **trait** (quality or characteristic), they both have the ability to calculate tax related prices.  
So let's see how we can use **traits**:


It is important to note that we are trying to **reduce the repetitiveness** of functions and values definition, not because we are lazy to write multiple times the same code, but to **reduce bugs** and **make easy further modifications** of your application.

> :raising_hand: How reducing the **repetitiveness of code** can **reduce bugs** and **make easy further modifications**?

Imagine, in the previous example, that you wrote `def tax(price: Double) = price / taxRate` in all your `object`s and you notice later that you made a mistake (which leads to a bug), the computation is wrong because we are dividing instead of multiplying! You will have to make the correction in all your `object`s one by one and it can be tiering (make easy further modifications!). Moreover, you might forget to make the correction (or just made the mistake at the first time) on one of them, which you will notice too late because it was only on the `GermanyPriceCalculator` and it's the only one you did not test (reduce bugs!).

```scala
trait PriceCalculator {
  val taxRate: Double

  def tax(price: Double) = price * taxRate
  
  def priceTaxIncluded(price: Double) = price + tax(price)
}

object UKPriceCalculator extends PriceCalculator {
  val taxRate = 0.20
}

object GreecePriceCalculator extends PriceCalculator {
  val taxRate = 0.23
}
```
